Documentation/dev-tools/kfence.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
.. Copyright (C) 2020, Google LLC.

Kernel Electric-Fence (KFENCE)
==============================

Kernel Electric-Fence (KFENCE) is a low-overhead sampling-based memory safety
error detector. KFENCE detects heap out-of-bounds access, use-after-free, and
invalid-free errors.

KFENCE is designed to be enabled in production kernels, and has near zero
performance overhead. Compared to KASAN, KFENCE trades performance for
precision. The main motivation behind KFENCE's design, is that with enough
total uptime KFENCE will detect bugs in code paths not typically exercised by
non-production test workloads. One way to quickly achieve a large enough total
uptime is when the tool is deployed across a large fleet of machines.

Usage
-----

To enable KFENCE, configure the kernel with::

    CONFIG_KFENCE=y

To build a kernel with KFENCE support, but disabled by default (to enable, set
``kfence.sample_interval`` to non-zero value), configure the kernel with::

    CONFIG_KFENCE=y
    CONFIG_KFENCE_SAMPLE_INTERVAL=0

KFENCE provides several other configuration options to customize behaviour (see
the respective help text in ``lib/Kconfig.kfence`` for more info).

Tuning performance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most important parameter is KFENCE's sample interval, which can be set via
the kernel boot parameter ``kfence.sample_interval`` in milliseconds. The
sample interval determines the frequency with which heap allocations will be
guarded by KFENCE. The default is configurable via the Kconfig option
``CONFIG_KFENCE_SAMPLE_INTERVAL``. Setting ``kfence.sample_interval=0``
disables KFENCE.

The KFENCE memory pool is of fixed size, and if the pool is exhausted, no
further KFENCE allocations occur. With ``CONFIG_KFENCE_NUM_OBJECTS`` (default
255), the number of available guarded objects can be controlled. Each object
requires 2 pages, one for the object itself and the other one used as a guard
page; object pages are interleaved with guard pages, and every object page is
therefore surrounded by two guard pages.

The total memory dedicated to the KFENCE memory pool can be computed as::

    ( #objects + 1 ) * 2 * PAGE_SIZE

Using the default config, and assuming a page size of 4 KiB, results in
dedicating 2 MiB to the KFENCE memory pool.

You can change the KFENCE memory pool size by setting ``kfence.num_objects``
in boot command line, or writing to
``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/num_objects`` when kfence is not enabled,
and the pool size of each node will be computed and updated
in the same way as above. You can set this value as large as possible, so
please be careful DO NOT use up all memorys.
When enabling KFENCE, ``num_objects`` will be adjusted to make the pool size
aligned up to 1GiB. That means, ``num_objects`` itself will be aligned up to
131071 (Unless ``num_objects`` is smaller than it and is regarded as using
the upstream mode).

You can enable/disable KFENCE dynamically after startup by writing a proper
number to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/sample_interval``. Setting this value
to 0 means disabling KFENCE, and unused KFENCE pool memory will be
automatically freed. Otherwise KFENCE will be enabled, it will try to alloc
enough memory to hold ``num_objects`` the user has set. If this value is a
negative number, sample_interval will be invalid, and KFENCE will alloc slabs
and pages from its pool at all time if possible.

You can change KFENCE pool mode by setting ``kfence.pool_mode`` in boot command
line, or writing to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/pool_mode`` when kfence is
not enabled. If the value is ``global`` (as default), ``num_objects`` becomes a
global total sum. The total KFENCE pools will hold ``num_objects`` slabs/pages.
Otherwise if the value is ``node``, ``num_objects`` becomes a per node value,
KFENCE pools on each node will hold ``num_objects`` slabs/pages separately.

Note: On architectures that support huge pages, KFENCE will ensure that the
pool is using pages of size ``PAGE_SIZE``. This will result in additional page
tables being allocated.

TLB recover issue
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For some arch like x86, kernel virtual address directly mapping to physical
address is mapped by PUD huge TLB, so that performance can be improved since
kernel no need to visit PMD and PTE. Each PUD covers an 1GiB area.

However, KFENCE needs to set guarded pages and breaks this design. PUD will be
splited to PTE, meaning that an 1GiB area will be splited to a large number of
4KiB (page size) areas. This may impact the performance.

To solve this issue, the size of each kfence pool area is forced to be 1GiB,
and one area can hold 131071 objects, calculating by::

    1GiB / 4KiB / 2 - 1 = 131071

So the user input kfence.num_objects will be aligned up to 131071 for
convenience of splitting them to several 1GiB areas.

One KFENCE pool area will be allocated in 1GiB aligned address, ensuring
only splitting one PUD. When KFENCE is disabled and there is no active
slabs/pages in this area, it will be freed and the corresponding TLB will
be recovered to the origin PUD.

An exception is the user input less than 131071 in boot cmdline. See mode 1
of the following examples.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

There are mainly three kinds of distributing method.

1. Upstream mode::

    num_objects < 131071
    pool_mode = global (cannot be node)
    sample_interval cannot be negative

   In this mode, everything looks like it is in upstream. However, if user
   enlarges ``num_objects`` after startup, it will be aligned up to 131071
   and become mode 2.

2. Global mode::

    num_objects >= 131071
    pool_mode = global

   For example, if num_objects = 131071 * 2, and there are 4 nodes in total.
   Node 0 and node 1 will separately alloc 1GiB memoty for KFENCE pools, and
   there is nothing to do with node 2 and node 3. Sampling slabs and pages on
   these empty nodes (2 and 3) will be mapped to previous nodes (0 and 1).

   If num_objects = 131071 * 6, the memory usage will be [2, 2, 1, 1]GiB on
   these 4 nodes.

3. Per node mode::

    num_objects >= 131071
    pool_mode = node

   This mode is easy to understand. If num_objects = 131071 * n, the memory
   usage will be [n, n, n, n]GiB on 4 nodes.

Monitoring specific slabs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If users want to enable or disable KFENCE for specific slabs, setting via
per_slab switch at ``/sys/kernel/slab/<cache>/kfence_enable``. The default
switch is ON for all slabs.

Users can also switch monitoring order0 pages by
setting ``kfence.order0_page`` in boot command line,
or writing to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/order0_page``.

Error reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, KFENCE will only report faults in dmesg. If users want to panic
the kernel, set ``kfence.fault=panic`` in boot command line, or write "panic"
to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/fault``.

The default value is "report". Users can switch between "report" and "panic"
at any time.

A typical out-of-bounds access looks like this::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: out-of-bounds read in test_out_of_bounds_read+0xa6/0x234

    Out-of-bounds read at 0xffff8c3f2e291fff (1B left of kfence-#72):
     test_out_of_bounds_read+0xa6/0x234
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#72: 0xffff8c3f2e292000-0xffff8c3f2e29201f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 484 on cpu 0 at 32.919330s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_out_of_bounds_read+0x9b/0x234
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 0 PID: 484 Comm: kunit_try_catch Not tainted 5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

The header of the report provides a short summary of the function involved in
the access. It is followed by more detailed information about the access and
its origin. Note that, real kernel addresses are only shown for
``CONFIG_DEBUG_KERNEL=y`` builds.

Use-after-free accesses are reported as::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: use-after-free read in test_use_after_free_read+0xb3/0x143

    Use-after-free read at 0xffff8c3f2e2a0000 (in kfence-#79):
     test_use_after_free_read+0xb3/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#79: 0xffff8c3f2e2a0000-0xffff8c3f2e2a001f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 488 on cpu 2 at 33.871326s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_use_after_free_read+0x76/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    freed by task 488 on cpu 2 at 33.871358s:
     test_use_after_free_read+0xa8/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 2 PID: 488 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

KFENCE also reports on invalid frees, such as double-frees::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: invalid free in test_double_free+0xdc/0x171

    Invalid free of 0xffff8c3f2e2a4000 (in kfence-#81):
     test_double_free+0xdc/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#81: 0xffff8c3f2e2a4000-0xffff8c3f2e2a401f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 490 on cpu 1 at 34.175321s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_double_free+0x76/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    freed by task 490 on cpu 1 at 34.175348s:
     test_double_free+0xa8/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 1 PID: 490 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

KFENCE also uses pattern-based redzones on the other side of an object's guard
page, to detect out-of-bounds writes on the unprotected side of the object.
These are reported on frees::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: memory corruption in test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0xef/0x184

    Corrupted memory at 0xffff8c3f2e33aff9 [ 0xac . . . . . . ] (in kfence-#156):
     test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0xef/0x184
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#156: 0xffff8c3f2e33afb0-0xffff8c3f2e33aff8, size=73, cache=kmalloc-96

    allocated by task 502 on cpu 7 at 42.159302s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0x57/0x184
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 7 PID: 502 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

For such errors, the address where the corruption occurred as well as the
invalidly written bytes (offset from the address) are shown; in this
representation, '.' denote untouched bytes. In the example above ``0xac`` is
the value written to the invalid address at offset 0, and the remaining '.'
denote that no following bytes have been touched. Note that, real values are
only shown for ``CONFIG_DEBUG_KERNEL=y`` builds; to avoid information
disclosure for non-debug builds, '!' is used instead to denote invalidly
written bytes.

And finally, KFENCE may also report on invalid accesses to any protected page
where it was not possible to determine an associated object, e.g. if adjacent
object pages had not yet been allocated::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: invalid read in test_invalid_access+0x26/0xe0

    Invalid read at 0xffffffffb670b00a:
     test_invalid_access+0x26/0xe0
     kunit_try_run_case+0x51/0x85
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x137/0x160
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 4 PID: 124 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G        W         5.8.0-rc6+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.13.0-1 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

DebugFS interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some debugging information is exposed via debugfs:

* The file ``/sys/kernel/debug/kfence/stats`` provides runtime statistics.

* The file ``/sys/kernel/debug/kfence/objects`` provides a list of objects
  allocated via KFENCE, including those already freed but protected.

Implementation Details
----------------------

Guarded allocations are set up based on the sample interval. After expiration
of the sample interval, the next allocation through the main allocator (SLAB or
SLUB) returns a guarded allocation from the KFENCE object pool (allocation
sizes up to PAGE_SIZE are supported). At this point, the timer is reset, and
the next allocation is set up after the expiration of the interval. To "gate" a
KFENCE allocation through the main allocator's fast-path without overhead,
KFENCE relies on static branches via the static keys infrastructure. The static
branch is toggled to redirect the allocation to KFENCE.

KFENCE objects each reside on a dedicated page, at either the left or right
page boundaries selected at random. The pages to the left and right of the
object page are "guard pages", whose attributes are changed to a protected
state, and cause page faults on any attempted access. Such page faults are then
intercepted by KFENCE, which handles the fault gracefully by reporting an
out-of-bounds access, and marking the page as accessible so that the faulting
code can (wrongly) continue executing (set ``panic_on_warn`` to panic instead).

To detect out-of-bounds writes to memory within the object's page itself,
KFENCE also uses pattern-based redzones. For each object page, a redzone is set
up for all non-object memory. For typical alignments, the redzone is only
required on the unguarded side of an object. Because KFENCE must honor the
cache's requested alignment, special alignments may result in unprotected gaps
on either side of an object, all of which are redzoned.

The following figure illustrates the page layout::

    ---+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---
       | xxxxxxxxx | O :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : O | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | B :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : B | xxxxxxxxx |
       | x GUARD x | J : RED-  | x GUARD x | RED-  : J | x GUARD x |
       | xxxxxxxxx | E :  ZONE | xxxxxxxxx |  ZONE : E | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | C :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : C | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | T :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : T | xxxxxxxxx |
    ---+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---

Upon deallocation of a KFENCE object, the object's page is again protected and
the object is marked as freed. Any further access to the object causes a fault
and KFENCE reports a use-after-free access. Freed objects are inserted at the
tail of KFENCE's freelist, so that the least recently freed objects are reused
first, and the chances of detecting use-after-frees of recently freed objects
is increased.

Interface
---------

The following describes the functions which are used by allocators as well as
page handling code to set up and deal with KFENCE allocations.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/kfence.h
   :functions: is_kfence_address
               kfence_shutdown_cache
               kfence_alloc kfence_free __kfence_free
               kfence_ksize kfence_object_start
               kfence_handle_page_fault

Related Tools
-------------

In userspace, a similar approach is taken by `GWP-ASan
<http://llvm.org/docs/GwpAsan.html>`_. GWP-ASan also relies on guard pages and
a sampling strategy to detect memory unsafety bugs at scale. KFENCE's design is
directly influenced by GWP-ASan, and can be seen as its kernel sibling. Another
similar but non-sampling approach, that also inspired the name "KFENCE", can be
found in the userspace `Electric Fence Malloc Debugger
<https://linux.die.net/man/3/efence>`_.

In the kernel, several tools exist to debug memory access errors, and in
particular KASAN can detect all bug classes that KFENCE can detect. While KASAN
is more precise, relying on compiler instrumentation, this comes at a
performance cost.

It is worth highlighting that KASAN and KFENCE are complementary, with
different target environments. For instance, KASAN is the better debugging-aid,
where test cases or reproducers exists: due to the lower chance to detect the
error, it would require more effort using KFENCE to debug. Deployments at scale
that cannot afford to enable KASAN, however, would benefit from using KFENCE to
discover bugs due to code paths not exercised by test cases or fuzzers.

Commit message:

anolis: kfence: introduce the limit of pool size at booting stage
ANBZ: #6165

For productization of kfence and applying it online, we need a general
config to control its memory cost for different machines. i.e., for
machines with small memory, the kfence should be disabled or its pool
size should be limited at a small value.

Introduce a boot cmdline named "kfence.booting_max" with a similar
syntax with crashkernel. A reasonable config can be:

    kfence.booting_max=0-128M:0,128M-256M:1M,256M-:2M

So that:
On machines with memory of [0, 128M), kfence will not be enabled.

On machines with memory of [128M, 256M), kfence will allocate at most 1MB
for kfence pool. (which means num_objects = 127 on page_size = 4KB)

On machines with memory larger than 256M, kfence will allocate at most 2MB
for kfence pool. (which means num_objects = 255 on page_size = 4KB)

Notes:
This config only sets the upper limit, so if the user sets
num_objects = 127 and kfence.booting_max=0-:2M, kfence will still allocate
1MB for pool.

This config only works for upstream mode. (pool_size < 1GB and
sample_interval > 0) Because if the user want to use debug mode, he must
focus on the specific machine and not need this general setting.

Signed-off-by: Tianchen Ding <dtcccc@linux.alibaba.com>
Reviewed-by: Baolin Wang <baolin.wang@linux.alibaba.com>
Reviewed-by: Kaihao Bai <carlo.bai@linux.alibaba.com>

Documentation/dev-tools/kfence.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
.. Copyright (C) 2020, Google LLC.

Kernel Electric-Fence (KFENCE)
==============================

Kernel Electric-Fence (KFENCE) is a low-overhead sampling-based memory safety
error detector. KFENCE detects heap out-of-bounds access, use-after-free, and
invalid-free errors.

KFENCE is designed to be enabled in production kernels, and has near zero
performance overhead. Compared to KASAN, KFENCE trades performance for
precision. The main motivation behind KFENCE's design, is that with enough
total uptime KFENCE will detect bugs in code paths not typically exercised by
non-production test workloads. One way to quickly achieve a large enough total
uptime is when the tool is deployed across a large fleet of machines.

Usage
-----

To enable KFENCE, configure the kernel with::

    CONFIG_KFENCE=y

To build a kernel with KFENCE support, but disabled by default (to enable, set
``kfence.sample_interval`` to non-zero value), configure the kernel with::

    CONFIG_KFENCE=y
    CONFIG_KFENCE_SAMPLE_INTERVAL=0

KFENCE provides several other configuration options to customize behaviour (see
the respective help text in ``lib/Kconfig.kfence`` for more info).

Tuning performance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most important parameter is KFENCE's sample interval, which can be set via
the kernel boot parameter ``kfence.sample_interval`` in milliseconds. The
sample interval determines the frequency with which heap allocations will be
guarded by KFENCE. The default is configurable via the Kconfig option
``CONFIG_KFENCE_SAMPLE_INTERVAL``. Setting ``kfence.sample_interval=0``
disables KFENCE.

The KFENCE memory pool is of fixed size, and if the pool is exhausted, no
further KFENCE allocations occur. With ``CONFIG_KFENCE_NUM_OBJECTS`` (default
255), the number of available guarded objects can be controlled. Each object
requires 2 pages, one for the object itself and the other one used as a guard
page; object pages are interleaved with guard pages, and every object page is
therefore surrounded by two guard pages.

The total memory dedicated to the KFENCE memory pool can be computed as::

    ( #objects + 1 ) * 2 * PAGE_SIZE

Using the default config, and assuming a page size of 4 KiB, results in
dedicating 2 MiB to the KFENCE memory pool.

You can change the KFENCE memory pool size by setting ``kfence.num_objects``
in boot command line, or writing to
``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/num_objects`` when kfence is not enabled,
and the pool size of each node will be computed and updated
in the same way as above. You can set this value as large as possible, so
please be careful DO NOT use up all memorys.
When enabling KFENCE, ``num_objects`` will be adjusted to make the pool size
aligned up to 1GiB. That means, ``num_objects`` itself will be aligned up to
131071 (Unless ``num_objects`` is smaller than it and is regarded as using
the upstream mode).

You can enable/disable KFENCE dynamically after startup by writing a proper
number to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/sample_interval``. Setting this value
to 0 means disabling KFENCE, and unused KFENCE pool memory will be
automatically freed. Otherwise KFENCE will be enabled, it will try to alloc
enough memory to hold ``num_objects`` the user has set. If this value is a
negative number, sample_interval will be invalid, and KFENCE will alloc slabs
and pages from its pool at all time if possible.

You can change KFENCE pool mode by setting ``kfence.pool_mode`` in boot command
line, or writing to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/pool_mode`` when kfence is
not enabled. If the value is ``global`` (as default), ``num_objects`` becomes a
global total sum. The total KFENCE pools will hold ``num_objects`` slabs/pages.
Otherwise if the value is ``node``, ``num_objects`` becomes a per node value,
KFENCE pools on each node will hold ``num_objects`` slabs/pages separately.

Note: On architectures that support huge pages, KFENCE will ensure that the
pool is using pages of size ``PAGE_SIZE``. This will result in additional page
tables being allocated.

TLB recover issue
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For some arch like x86, kernel virtual address directly mapping to physical
address is mapped by PUD huge TLB, so that performance can be improved since
kernel no need to visit PMD and PTE. Each PUD covers an 1GiB area.

However, KFENCE needs to set guarded pages and breaks this design. PUD will be
splited to PTE, meaning that an 1GiB area will be splited to a large number of
4KiB (page size) areas. This may impact the performance.

To solve this issue, the size of each kfence pool area is forced to be 1GiB,
and one area can hold 131071 objects, calculating by::

    1GiB / 4KiB / 2 - 1 = 131071

So the user input kfence.num_objects will be aligned up to 131071 for
convenience of splitting them to several 1GiB areas.

One KFENCE pool area will be allocated in 1GiB aligned address, ensuring
only splitting one PUD. When KFENCE is disabled and there is no active
slabs/pages in this area, it will be freed and the corresponding TLB will
be recovered to the origin PUD.

An exception is the user input less than 131071 in boot cmdline. See mode 1
of the following examples.

Set a pool limit on various memory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Like crashkernel, the user can limit the size of kfence pool by setting
``kfence.booting_max`` in boot command line. A reasonable config can be::

    kfence.booting_max=0-128M:0,128M-256M:1M,256M-:2M

So that:
   On machines with memory of [0, 128M), kfence will not be enabled.

   On machines with memory of [128M, 256M), kfence will allocate at most 1MB
   for kfence pool. (which means num_objects = 127 on page_size = 4KB)

   On machines with memory larger than 256M, kfence will allocate at most 2MB
   for kfence pool. (which means num_objects = 255 on page_size = 4KB)

Notes:
   This config only sets the upper limit, so if the user sets num_objects = 127
   and ``kfence.booting_max=0-:2M``, kfence will still allocate 1MB for pool.

   This config only works for upstream mode. (pool_size < 1GB and
   sample_interval > 0) Because if the user want to use debug mode, he must
   focus on the specific machine and not need this general setting.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

There are mainly three kinds of distributing method.

1. Upstream mode::

    num_objects < 131071
    pool_mode = global (cannot be node)
    sample_interval cannot be negative

   In this mode, everything looks like it is in upstream. However, if user
   enlarges ``num_objects`` after startup, it will be aligned up to 131071
   and become mode 2.

2. Global mode::

    num_objects >= 131071
    pool_mode = global

   For example, if num_objects = 131071 * 2, and there are 4 nodes in total.
   Node 0 and node 1 will separately alloc 1GiB memoty for KFENCE pools, and
   there is nothing to do with node 2 and node 3. Sampling slabs and pages on
   these empty nodes (2 and 3) will be mapped to previous nodes (0 and 1).

   If num_objects = 131071 * 6, the memory usage will be [2, 2, 1, 1]GiB on
   these 4 nodes.

3. Per node mode::

    num_objects >= 131071
    pool_mode = node

   This mode is easy to understand. If num_objects = 131071 * n, the memory
   usage will be [n, n, n, n]GiB on 4 nodes.

Monitoring specific slabs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If users want to enable or disable KFENCE for specific slabs, setting via
per_slab switch at ``/sys/kernel/slab/<cache>/kfence_enable``. The default
switch is ON for all slabs.

Users can also switch monitoring order0 pages by
setting ``kfence.order0_page`` in boot command line,
or writing to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/order0_page``.

Error reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, KFENCE will only report faults in dmesg. If users want to panic
the kernel, set ``kfence.fault=panic`` in boot command line, or write "panic"
to ``/sys/module/kfence/parameters/fault``.

The default value is "report". Users can switch between "report" and "panic"
at any time.

A typical out-of-bounds access looks like this::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: out-of-bounds read in test_out_of_bounds_read+0xa6/0x234

    Out-of-bounds read at 0xffff8c3f2e291fff (1B left of kfence-#72):
     test_out_of_bounds_read+0xa6/0x234
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#72: 0xffff8c3f2e292000-0xffff8c3f2e29201f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 484 on cpu 0 at 32.919330s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_out_of_bounds_read+0x9b/0x234
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 0 PID: 484 Comm: kunit_try_catch Not tainted 5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

The header of the report provides a short summary of the function involved in
the access. It is followed by more detailed information about the access and
its origin. Note that, real kernel addresses are only shown for
``CONFIG_DEBUG_KERNEL=y`` builds.

Use-after-free accesses are reported as::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: use-after-free read in test_use_after_free_read+0xb3/0x143

    Use-after-free read at 0xffff8c3f2e2a0000 (in kfence-#79):
     test_use_after_free_read+0xb3/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#79: 0xffff8c3f2e2a0000-0xffff8c3f2e2a001f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 488 on cpu 2 at 33.871326s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_use_after_free_read+0x76/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    freed by task 488 on cpu 2 at 33.871358s:
     test_use_after_free_read+0xa8/0x143
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 2 PID: 488 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

KFENCE also reports on invalid frees, such as double-frees::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: invalid free in test_double_free+0xdc/0x171

    Invalid free of 0xffff8c3f2e2a4000 (in kfence-#81):
     test_double_free+0xdc/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#81: 0xffff8c3f2e2a4000-0xffff8c3f2e2a401f, size=32, cache=kmalloc-32

    allocated by task 490 on cpu 1 at 34.175321s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_double_free+0x76/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    freed by task 490 on cpu 1 at 34.175348s:
     test_double_free+0xa8/0x171
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 1 PID: 490 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

KFENCE also uses pattern-based redzones on the other side of an object's guard
page, to detect out-of-bounds writes on the unprotected side of the object.
These are reported on frees::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: memory corruption in test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0xef/0x184

    Corrupted memory at 0xffff8c3f2e33aff9 [ 0xac . . . . . . ] (in kfence-#156):
     test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0xef/0x184
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    kfence-#156: 0xffff8c3f2e33afb0-0xffff8c3f2e33aff8, size=73, cache=kmalloc-96

    allocated by task 502 on cpu 7 at 42.159302s:
     test_alloc+0xfe/0x738
     test_kmalloc_aligned_oob_write+0x57/0x184
     kunit_try_run_case+0x61/0xa0
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x176/0x1b0
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 7 PID: 502 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G    B             5.13.0-rc3+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.14.0-2 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

For such errors, the address where the corruption occurred as well as the
invalidly written bytes (offset from the address) are shown; in this
representation, '.' denote untouched bytes. In the example above ``0xac`` is
the value written to the invalid address at offset 0, and the remaining '.'
denote that no following bytes have been touched. Note that, real values are
only shown for ``CONFIG_DEBUG_KERNEL=y`` builds; to avoid information
disclosure for non-debug builds, '!' is used instead to denote invalidly
written bytes.

And finally, KFENCE may also report on invalid accesses to any protected page
where it was not possible to determine an associated object, e.g. if adjacent
object pages had not yet been allocated::

    ==================================================================
    BUG: KFENCE: invalid read in test_invalid_access+0x26/0xe0

    Invalid read at 0xffffffffb670b00a:
     test_invalid_access+0x26/0xe0
     kunit_try_run_case+0x51/0x85
     kunit_generic_run_threadfn_adapter+0x16/0x30
     kthread+0x137/0x160
     ret_from_fork+0x22/0x30

    CPU: 4 PID: 124 Comm: kunit_try_catch Tainted: G        W         5.8.0-rc6+ #7
    Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS 1.13.0-1 04/01/2014
    ==================================================================

DebugFS interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some debugging information is exposed via debugfs:

* The file ``/sys/kernel/debug/kfence/stats`` provides runtime statistics.

* The file ``/sys/kernel/debug/kfence/objects`` provides a list of objects
  allocated via KFENCE, including those already freed but protected.

Implementation Details
----------------------

Guarded allocations are set up based on the sample interval. After expiration
of the sample interval, the next allocation through the main allocator (SLAB or
SLUB) returns a guarded allocation from the KFENCE object pool (allocation
sizes up to PAGE_SIZE are supported). At this point, the timer is reset, and
the next allocation is set up after the expiration of the interval. To "gate" a
KFENCE allocation through the main allocator's fast-path without overhead,
KFENCE relies on static branches via the static keys infrastructure. The static
branch is toggled to redirect the allocation to KFENCE.

KFENCE objects each reside on a dedicated page, at either the left or right
page boundaries selected at random. The pages to the left and right of the
object page are "guard pages", whose attributes are changed to a protected
state, and cause page faults on any attempted access. Such page faults are then
intercepted by KFENCE, which handles the fault gracefully by reporting an
out-of-bounds access, and marking the page as accessible so that the faulting
code can (wrongly) continue executing (set ``panic_on_warn`` to panic instead).

To detect out-of-bounds writes to memory within the object's page itself,
KFENCE also uses pattern-based redzones. For each object page, a redzone is set
up for all non-object memory. For typical alignments, the redzone is only
required on the unguarded side of an object. Because KFENCE must honor the
cache's requested alignment, special alignments may result in unprotected gaps
on either side of an object, all of which are redzoned.

The following figure illustrates the page layout::

    ---+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---
       | xxxxxxxxx | O :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : O | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | B :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : B | xxxxxxxxx |
       | x GUARD x | J : RED-  | x GUARD x | RED-  : J | x GUARD x |
       | xxxxxxxxx | E :  ZONE | xxxxxxxxx |  ZONE : E | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | C :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : C | xxxxxxxxx |
       | xxxxxxxxx | T :       | xxxxxxxxx |       : T | xxxxxxxxx |
    ---+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---

Upon deallocation of a KFENCE object, the object's page is again protected and
the object is marked as freed. Any further access to the object causes a fault
and KFENCE reports a use-after-free access. Freed objects are inserted at the
tail of KFENCE's freelist, so that the least recently freed objects are reused
first, and the chances of detecting use-after-frees of recently freed objects
is increased.

Interface
---------

The following describes the functions which are used by allocators as well as
page handling code to set up and deal with KFENCE allocations.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/kfence.h
   :functions: is_kfence_address
               kfence_shutdown_cache
               kfence_alloc kfence_free __kfence_free
               kfence_ksize kfence_object_start
               kfence_handle_page_fault

Related Tools
-------------

In userspace, a similar approach is taken by `GWP-ASan
<http://llvm.org/docs/GwpAsan.html>`_. GWP-ASan also relies on guard pages and
a sampling strategy to detect memory unsafety bugs at scale. KFENCE's design is
directly influenced by GWP-ASan, and can be seen as its kernel sibling. Another
similar but non-sampling approach, that also inspired the name "KFENCE", can be
found in the userspace `Electric Fence Malloc Debugger
<https://linux.die.net/man/3/efence>`_.

In the kernel, several tools exist to debug memory access errors, and in
particular KASAN can detect all bug classes that KFENCE can detect. While KASAN
is more precise, relying on compiler instrumentation, this comes at a
performance cost.

It is worth highlighting that KASAN and KFENCE are complementary, with
different target environments. For instance, KASAN is the better debugging-aid,
where test cases or reproducers exists: due to the lower chance to detect the
error, it would require more effort using KFENCE to debug. Deployments at scale
that cannot afford to enable KASAN, however, would benefit from using KFENCE to
discover bugs due to code paths not exercised by test cases or fuzzers.
